tutorials-v4/lectures/Lecture-6-Quantum-Monte-Carlo-Trajectories.md, before:

---
jupyter:
  jupytext:
    text_representation:
      extension: .md
      format_name: markdown
      format_version: '1.3'
      jupytext_version: 1.13.8
---

# QuTiP lecture: Quantum Monte-Carlo Trajectories


Author: J. R. Johansson (robert@riken.jp), https://jrjohansson.github.io/

The latest version of this [IPython notebook](http://ipython.org/ipython-doc/dev/interactive/htmlnotebook.html) lecture is available at [http://github.com/jrjohansson/qutip-lectures](http://github.com/jrjohansson/qutip-lectures).

The other notebooks in this lecture series are indexed at [https://qutip.org/tutorials](https://qutip.org/tutorials).

The example in this lecture is based on an example by P.D. Nation.

```python
%matplotlib inline
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import numpy as np
```

```python
from qutip import *
```

## Introduction to the Quantum Monte-Carlo trajectory method

The Quantum Monte-Carlo trajectory method is an equation of motion for a single realization of the state vector $\left|\psi(t)\right>$ for a quantum system that interacts with its environment. The dynamics of the wave function is given by the Schrodinger equation,

<center>
$\displaystyle\frac{d}{dt}\left|\psi(t)\right> = - \frac{i}{\hbar} H_{\rm eff} \left|\psi(t)\right>$
</center>

where the Hamiltonian is an effective Hamiltonian that, in addition to the system Hamiltonian $H(t)$, also contains a non-Hermitian contribution due to the interaction with the environment:

<center>
$\displaystyle H_{\rm eff}(t) = H(t) - \frac{i\hbar}{2}\sum_n c_n^\dagger c_n$
</center>

Since the effective Hamiltonian is non-Hermitian, the norm of the wavefunction is decreasing with time, which to first order in a small time step $\delta t$ is given by $\langle\psi(t+\delta t)|\psi(t+\delta t)\rangle \approx 1 - \delta p\;\;\;$, where 

<center>
$\displaystyle \delta p = \delta t \sum_n \left<\psi(t)|c_n^\dagger c_n|\psi(t)\right>$
</center>

The decreasing norm is used to determine when so-called quantum jumps are to be imposed on the dynamics, where we compare $\delta p$ to a random number in the range [0, 1]. If the norm has decreased below the randomly chosen number, we apply a "quantum jump", so that the new wavefunction at $t+\delta t$ is given by

<center>
$\left|\psi(t+\delta t)\right> = c_n \left|\psi(t)\right>/\left<\psi(t)|c_n^\dagger c_n|\psi(t)\right>^{1/2}$ 
</center>

for a randomly chosen collapse operator $c_n$, weighted so the probability that the collapse being described by the nth collapse operator is given by
    
<center>
$\displaystyle P_n = \left<\psi(t)|c_n^\dagger c_n|\psi(t)\right>/{\delta p}$ 
</center>



## Decay of a single-photon Fock state in a cavity

This is a Monte-Carlo simulation showing the decay of a cavity Fock state $\left|1\right>$ in a thermal environment with an average occupation number of $n=0.063$ .

Here, the coupling strength is given by the inverse of the cavity ring-down time $T_c = 0.129$ .

The parameters chosen here correspond to those from S. Gleyzes, et al., Nature 446, 297 (2007), and we will carry out a simulation that corresponds to these experimental results from that paper:

```python
from IPython.display import Image
Image(filename='images/exdecay.png')
```

### Problem parameters

```python
N = 4               # number of basis states to consider
kappa = 1.0/0.129   # coupling to heat bath
nth = 0.063         # temperature with <n>=0.063

tlist = np.linspace(0,0.6,100)
```

## Create operators, Hamiltonian and initial state

Here we create QuTiP `Qobj` representations of the operators and state that are involved in this problem.

```python
a = destroy(N)      # cavity destruction operator
H = a.dag() * a     # harmonic oscillator Hamiltonian
psi0 = basis(N,1)   # initial Fock state with one photon: |1>
```

## Create a list of collapse operators that describe the dissipation

```python
# collapse operator list
c_op_list = []

# decay operator
c_op_list.append(sqrt(kappa * (1 + nth)) * a)

# excitation operator
c_op_list.append(sqrt(kappa * nth) * a.dag())
```

## Monte-Carlo simulation

Here we start the Monte-Carlo simulation, and we request expectation values of photon number operators with 1, 5, 15, and 904 trajectories (compare with experimental results above).

```python
ntraj = [1, 5, 15, 904] # list of number of trajectories to avg. over

mc = mcsolve(H, psi0, tlist, c_op_list, [a.dag()*a], ntraj)
```

The expectation values of $a^\dagger a$ are now available in array ``mc.expect[idx][0]`` where ``idx`` takes values in ``[0,1,2,3]`` corresponding to the averages of ``1, 5, 15, 904`` Monte Carlo trajectories, as specified above. Below we plot the array ``mc.expect[idx][0]`` vs. ``tlist`` for each index ``idx``.


## Lindblad master-equation simulation and steady state

For comparison with the averages of single quantum trajectories provided by the Monte-Carlo solver we here also calculate the dynamics of the Lindblad master equation, which should agree with the Monte-Carlo simultions for infinite number of trajectories.

```python
# run master equation to get ensemble average expectation values
me = mesolve(H, psi0, tlist, c_op_list, [a.dag()*a])

# calulate final state using steadystate solver
final_state = steadystate(H, c_op_list) # find steady-state
fexpt = expect(a.dag()*a, final_state)  # find expectation value for particle number
```

## Plot the results

```python
import matplotlib.font_manager
leg_prop = matplotlib.font_manager.FontProperties(size=10)

fig, axes = plt.subplots(4, 1, sharex=True, figsize=(8,12))

fig.subplots_adjust(hspace=0.1) # reduce space between plots

for idx, n in enumerate(ntraj):

    axes[idx].step(tlist, mc.expect[idx][0], 'b', lw=2)
    axes[idx].plot(tlist, me.expect[0], 'r--', lw=1.5)
    axes[idx].axhline(y=fexpt, color='k', lw=1.5)
    
    axes[idx].set_yticks(np.linspace(0, 2, 5))
    axes[idx].set_ylim([0, 1.5])
    axes[idx].set_ylabel(r'$\left<N\right>$', fontsize=14)
    
    if idx == 0:
        axes[idx].set_title("Ensemble Averaging of Monte Carlo Trajectories")
        axes[idx].legend(('Single trajectory', 'master equation', 'steady state'), prop=leg_prop)
    else:
        axes[idx].legend(('%d trajectories' % n, 'master equation', 'steady state'), prop=leg_prop)
        

axes[3].xaxis.set_major_locator(plt.MaxNLocator(4))
axes[3].set_xlabel('Time (sec)',fontsize=14);
```

### Software versions:

```python
from qutip.ipynbtools import version_table

version_table()
```

Commit message:

update first part of notebooks

tutorials-v4/lectures/Lecture-6-Quantum-Monte-Carlo-Trajectories.md, after:

---
jupyter:
  jupytext:
    text_representation:
      extension: .md
      format_name: markdown
      format_version: '1.3'
      jupytext_version: 1.13.8
  kernelspec:
    display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
    language: python
    name: python3
---

# QuTiP lecture: Quantum Monte-Carlo Trajectories


Author: J. R. Johansson (robert@riken.jp), https://jrjohansson.github.io/

This lecture series was developed by J.R. Johannson. The original lecture notebooks are available [here](https://github.com/jrjohansson/qutip-lectures).

This is a slightly modified version of the lectures, to work with the current release of QuTiP. You can find these lectures as a part of the [qutip-tutorials repository](https://github.com/qutip/qutip-tutorials). This lecture and other tutorial notebooks are indexed at the [QuTiP Tutorial webpage](https://qutip.org/tutorials.html).

```python
%matplotlib inline
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import numpy as np
```

```python
from qutip import *
```

## Introduction to the Quantum Monte-Carlo trajectory method

The Quantum Monte-Carlo trajectory method is an equation of motion for a single realization of the state vector $\left|\psi(t)\right>$ for a quantum system that interacts with its environment. The dynamics of the wave function is given by the Schrodinger equation,

<center>
$\displaystyle\frac{d}{dt}\left|\psi(t)\right> = - \frac{i}{\hbar} H_{\rm eff} \left|\psi(t)\right>$
</center>

where the Hamiltonian is an effective Hamiltonian that, in addition to the system Hamiltonian $H(t)$, also contains a non-Hermitian contribution due to the interaction with the environment:

<center>
$\displaystyle H_{\rm eff}(t) = H(t) - \frac{i\hbar}{2}\sum_n c_n^\dagger c_n$
</center>

Since the effective Hamiltonian is non-Hermitian, the norm of the wavefunction is decreasing with time, which to first order in a small time step $\delta t$ is given by $\langle\psi(t+\delta t)|\psi(t+\delta t)\rangle \approx 1 - \delta p\;\;\;$, where 

<center>
$\displaystyle \delta p = \delta t \sum_n \left<\psi(t)|c_n^\dagger c_n|\psi(t)\right>$
</center>

The decreasing norm is used to determine when so-called quantum jumps are to be imposed on the dynamics, where we compare $\delta p$ to a random number in the range [0, 1]. If the norm has decreased below the randomly chosen number, we apply a "quantum jump", so that the new wavefunction at $t+\delta t$ is given by

<center>
$\left|\psi(t+\delta t)\right> = c_n \left|\psi(t)\right>/\left<\psi(t)|c_n^\dagger c_n|\psi(t)\right>^{1/2}$ 
</center>

for a randomly chosen collapse operator $c_n$, weighted so the probability that the collapse being described by the nth collapse operator is given by
    
<center>
$\displaystyle P_n = \left<\psi(t)|c_n^\dagger c_n|\psi(t)\right>/{\delta p}$ 
</center>



## Decay of a single-photon Fock state in a cavity

This is a Monte-Carlo simulation showing the decay of a cavity Fock state $\left|1\right>$ in a thermal environment with an average occupation number of $n=0.063$ .

Here, the coupling strength is given by the inverse of the cavity ring-down time $T_c = 0.129$ .

The parameters chosen here correspond to those from S. Gleyzes, et al., Nature 446, 297 (2007), and we will carry out a simulation that corresponds to these experimental results from that paper:

```python
from IPython.display import Image
Image(filename='images/exdecay.png')
```

### Problem parameters

```python
N = 4               # number of basis states to consider
kappa = 1.0/0.129   # coupling to heat bath
nth = 0.063         # temperature with <n>=0.063

tlist = np.linspace(0,0.6,100)
```

## Create operators, Hamiltonian and initial state

Here we create QuTiP `Qobj` representations of the operators and state that are involved in this problem.

```python
a = destroy(N)      # cavity destruction operator
H = a.dag() * a     # harmonic oscillator Hamiltonian
psi0 = basis(N,1)   # initial Fock state with one photon: |1>
```

## Create a list of collapse operators that describe the dissipation

```python
# collapse operator list
c_op_list = []

# decay operator
c_op_list.append(np.sqrt(kappa * (1 + nth)) * a)

# excitation operator
c_op_list.append(np.sqrt(kappa * nth) * a.dag())
```

## Monte-Carlo simulation

Here we start the Monte-Carlo simulation, and we request expectation values of photon number operators with 1, 5, 15, and 904 trajectories (compare with experimental results above).

```python
ntraj = [1, 5, 15, 904] # list of number of trajectories to avg. over

mc = mcsolve(H, psi0, tlist, c_op_list, [a.dag()*a], ntraj)
```

The expectation values of $a^\dagger a$ are now available in array ``mc.expect[idx][0]`` where ``idx`` takes values in ``[0,1,2,3]`` corresponding to the averages of ``1, 5, 15, 904`` Monte Carlo trajectories, as specified above. Below we plot the array ``mc.expect[idx][0]`` vs. ``tlist`` for each index ``idx``.


## Lindblad master-equation simulation and steady state

For comparison with the averages of single quantum trajectories provided by the Monte-Carlo solver we here also calculate the dynamics of the Lindblad master equation, which should agree with the Monte-Carlo simultions for infinite number of trajectories.

```python
# run master equation to get ensemble average expectation values
me = mesolve(H, psi0, tlist, c_op_list, [a.dag()*a])

# calulate final state using steadystate solver
final_state = steadystate(H, c_op_list) # find steady-state
fexpt = expect(a.dag()*a, final_state)  # find expectation value for particle number
```

## Plot the results

```python
import matplotlib.font_manager
leg_prop = matplotlib.font_manager.FontProperties(size=10)

fig, axes = plt.subplots(4, 1, sharex=True, figsize=(8,12))

fig.subplots_adjust(hspace=0.1) # reduce space between plots

for idx, n in enumerate(ntraj):

    axes[idx].step(tlist, mc.expect[idx][0], 'b', lw=2)
    axes[idx].plot(tlist, me.expect[0], 'r--', lw=1.5)
    axes[idx].axhline(y=fexpt, color='k', lw=1.5)
    
    axes[idx].set_yticks(np.linspace(0, 2, 5))
    axes[idx].set_ylim([0, 1.5])
    axes[idx].set_ylabel(r'$\left<N\right>$', fontsize=14)
    
    if idx == 0:
        axes[idx].set_title("Ensemble Averaging of Monte Carlo Trajectories")
        axes[idx].legend(('Single trajectory', 'master equation', 'steady state'), prop=leg_prop)
    else:
        axes[idx].legend(('%d trajectories' % n, 'master equation', 'steady state'), prop=leg_prop)
        

axes[3].xaxis.set_major_locator(plt.MaxNLocator(4))
axes[3].set_xlabel('Time (sec)',fontsize=14);
```

### Software versions:

```python
from qutip import about
about()
```
