tutorials-v4/lectures/Lecture-9-Squeezed-states-of-harmonic-oscillator.md, before:

---
jupyter:
  jupytext:
    text_representation:
      extension: .md
      format_name: markdown
      format_version: '1.3'
      jupytext_version: 1.13.8
---

# Lecture 9: Squeezed states of a quantum harmonic oscillator

Author: J.R. Johansson, robert@riken.jp

https://jrjohansson.github.io/

Latest version of this ipython notebook lecture is available at: http://github.com/jrjohansson/qutip-lectures

```python
%matplotlib inline
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import numpy as np
```

```python
from IPython.display import HTML
from matplotlib import animation
```

```python
from qutip import *
```

## Introduction

In quantum mechanics, each measurement of an observable (corresponding to an Hermitian operator) results in stochastic outcome that follows some probability distribution. The expectation value of the operator is the average of many measurement outcomes, and the standard deviation of the operator describes the uncertainty in the outcomes.

This uncertainty is intrinsic in quantum mechanics, and cannot be eliminated. The Heisenberg uncertainty principle describes the minumum uncertainly for pairs of noncommuting operators. For example, the operators such $x$ and $p$, which satisfy the commutation relation $[x, p] = i\hbar$, must always satisfy $(\Delta x) (\Delta p) >= \hbar/2$ .

A state that satisfies

$(\Delta x) (\Delta p) = \hbar/2$

is called a minimum uncertainty state, and a state for which, for example, 

$(\Delta x)^2 < \hbar/2$ 

is called a squeezed state. Note that in this case $(\Delta p)^2$ must be larger than $\hbar/2(\Delta x)^2$ for the Heisenberg relation to hold. Squeezing a quantum state so that the variance of one operator $x$ is reduced below the minimum uncertainty limit therefore necessarily amplify the variance of operators that do not commute with $x$, such as $p$.

For harmonic modes, squeezing of $x$ or $p$ is called quadrature squeezing, and it is probably the most common form of squeezing. 

In this QuTiP notebook we look at how expectation values and variances of the quadrature operators $x$ or $p$ of a single harmonic mode evolve in time when initially in different kinds of squeezed states. 


## Parameters

```python
N = 35
w = 1 * 2 * np.pi              # oscillator frequency
tlist = np.linspace(0, 4, 101) # periods
```

```python
# operators
a = destroy(N)
n = num(N)
x = (a + a.dag())/np.sqrt(2)
p = -1j * (a - a.dag())/np.sqrt(2)
```

```python
# the quantum harmonic oscillator Hamiltonian
H = w * a.dag() * a
```

```python
c_ops = []

# uncomment to see how things change when disspation is included
# c_ops = [np.sqrt(0.25) * a]
```

## Functions for plotting

Since we want to repeat the same kind of calculation and visualization for several different states, we first define a few functions that we can reuse for each state later on.

```python
def plot_expect_with_variance(N, op_list, op_title, states):
    """
    Plot the expectation value of an operator (list of operators)
    with an envelope that describes the operators variance.
    """
    
    fig, axes = plt.subplots(1, len(op_list), figsize=(14,3))

    for idx, op in enumerate(op_list):
        
        e_op = expect(op, states)
        v_op = variance(op, states)

        axes[idx].fill_between(tlist, e_op - np.sqrt(v_op), e_op + np.sqrt(v_op), color="green", alpha=0.5);
        axes[idx].plot(tlist, e_op, label="expectation")
        axes[idx].set_xlabel('Time')
        axes[idx].set_title(op_title[idx])

    return fig, axes
```

```python
from base64 import b64encode

def display_embedded_video(filename):
    video = open(filename, "rb").read()
    video_encoded = b64encode(video).decode("ascii")
    video_tag = '<video controls alt="test" src="data:video/x-m4v;base64,{0}">'.format(video_encoded)
    return HTML(video_tag)
```

## Coherent state

For reference, let's first look at the time evolution of a coherent state.

```python
psi0 = coherent(N, 2.0)
```

```python
result = mesolve(H, psi0, tlist, c_ops, [])
```

```python
plot_expect_with_variance(N, [n, x, p], [r'$n$', r'$x$', r'$p$'], result.states);
```

```python
fig, axes = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(10,5))

def update(n):
    axes[0].cla()
    plot_wigner_fock_distribution(result.states[n], fig=fig, axes=axes)

anim = animation.FuncAnimation(fig, update, frames=len(result.states), blit=True)

anim.save('/tmp/animation-coherent-state.mp4', fps=20, writer="avconv", codec="libx264")

plt.close(fig)
```

```python
display_embedded_video("/tmp/animation-coherent-state.mp4")
```

## Squeezed vacuum

```python
psi0 = squeeze(N, 1.0) * basis(N, 0)
```

```python
result = mesolve(H, psi0, tlist, c_ops, [])
```

```python
plot_expect_with_variance(N, [n, x, p], [r'$n$', r'$x$', r'$p$'], result.states);
```

```python
fig, axes = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(10,5))

def update(n):
    axes[0].cla()
    plot_wigner_fock_distribution(result.states[n], fig=fig, axes=axes)

anim = animation.FuncAnimation(fig, update, frames=len(result.states), blit=True)

anim.save('/tmp/animation-squeezed-vacuum.mp4', fps=20, writer="avconv", codec="libx264")

plt.close(fig)
```

```python
display_embedded_video("/tmp/animation-squeezed-vacuum.mp4")
```

## Squeezed coherent state

```python
psi0 = displace(N, 2) * squeeze(N, 1.0) * basis(N, 0)  # first squeeze vacuum and then displace
```

```python
result = mesolve(H, psi0, tlist, c_ops, [])
```

```python
plot_expect_with_variance(N, [n, x, p], [r'$n$', r'$x$', r'$p$'], result.states);
```

```python
fig, axes = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(10,5))

def update(n):
    axes[0].cla()
    plot_wigner_fock_distribution(result.states[n], fig=fig, axes=axes)

anim = animation.FuncAnimation(fig, update, frames=len(result.states), blit=True)

anim.save('/tmp/animation-squeezed-coherent-state.mp4', fps=20, writer="avconv", codec="libx264")

plt.close(fig)
```

```python
display_embedded_video("/tmp/animation-squeezed-coherent-state.mp4")
```

### Software versions

```python
from qutip.ipynbtools import version_table; version_table()
```

Commit message:

adapt to current qutip release and explicit imports

tutorials-v4/lectures/Lecture-9-Squeezed-states-of-harmonic-oscillator.md, after:

---
jupyter:
  jupytext:
    text_representation:
      extension: .md
      format_name: markdown
      format_version: '1.3'
      jupytext_version: 1.13.8
  kernelspec:
    display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
    language: python
    name: python3
---

# Lecture 9: Squeezed states of a quantum harmonic oscillator

Author: J. R. Johansson (robert@riken.jp), https://jrjohansson.github.io/

This lecture series was developed by J.R. Johannson. The original lecture notebooks are available [here](https://github.com/jrjohansson/qutip-lectures).

This is a slightly modified version of the lectures, to work with the current release of QuTiP. You can find these lectures as a part of the [qutip-tutorials repository](https://github.com/qutip/qutip-tutorials). This lecture and other tutorial notebooks are indexed at the [QuTiP Tutorial webpage](https://qutip.org/tutorials.html).

```python
%matplotlib inline
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import numpy as np
from IPython.display import HTML
from matplotlib import animation
from qutip import destroy, num, expect, variance, coherent, mesolve, squeeze, displace, plot_wigner_fock_distribution
```

## Introduction

In quantum mechanics, each measurement of an observable (corresponding to an Hermitian operator) results in stochastic outcome that follows some probability distribution. The expectation value of the operator is the average of many measurement outcomes, and the standard deviation of the operator describes the uncertainty in the outcomes.

This uncertainty is intrinsic in quantum mechanics, and cannot be eliminated. The Heisenberg uncertainty principle describes the minumum uncertainly for pairs of noncommuting operators. For example, the operators such $x$ and $p$, which satisfy the commutation relation $[x, p] = i\hbar$, must always satisfy $(\Delta x) (\Delta p) >= \hbar/2$ .

A state that satisfies

$(\Delta x) (\Delta p) = \hbar/2$

is called a minimum uncertainty state, and a state for which, for example, 

$(\Delta x)^2 < \hbar/2$ 

is called a squeezed state. Note that in this case $(\Delta p)^2$ must be larger than $\hbar/2(\Delta x)^2$ for the Heisenberg relation to hold. Squeezing a quantum state so that the variance of one operator $x$ is reduced below the minimum uncertainty limit therefore necessarily amplify the variance of operators that do not commute with $x$, such as $p$.

For harmonic modes, squeezing of $x$ or $p$ is called quadrature squeezing, and it is probably the most common form of squeezing. 

In this QuTiP notebook we look at how expectation values and variances of the quadrature operators $x$ or $p$ of a single harmonic mode evolve in time when initially in different kinds of squeezed states. 


## Parameters

```python
N = 35
w = 1 * 2 * np.pi              # oscillator frequency
tlist = np.linspace(0, 4, 101) # periods
```

```python
# operators
a = destroy(N)
n = num(N)
x = (a + a.dag())/np.sqrt(2)
p = -1j * (a - a.dag())/np.sqrt(2)
```

```python
# the quantum harmonic oscillator Hamiltonian
H = w * a.dag() * a
```

```python
c_ops = []

# uncomment to see how things change when disspation is included
# c_ops = [np.sqrt(0.25) * a]
```

## Functions for plotting

Since we want to repeat the same kind of calculation and visualization for several different states, we first define a few functions that we can reuse for each state later on.

```python
def plot_expect_with_variance(N, op_list, op_title, states):
    """
    Plot the expectation value of an operator (list of operators)
    with an envelope that describes the operators variance.
    """
    
    fig, axes = plt.subplots(1, len(op_list), figsize=(14,3))

    for idx, op in enumerate(op_list):
        
        e_op = expect(op, states)
        v_op = variance(op, states)

        axes[idx].fill_between(tlist, e_op - np.sqrt(v_op), e_op + np.sqrt(v_op), color="green", alpha=0.5);
        axes[idx].plot(tlist, e_op, label="expectation")
        axes[idx].set_xlabel('Time')
        axes[idx].set_title(op_title[idx])

    return fig, axes
```

```python
from base64 import b64encode

def display_embedded_video(filename):
    video = open(filename, "rb").read()
    video_encoded = b64encode(video).decode("ascii")
    video_tag = '<video controls alt="test" src="data:video/x-m4v;base64,{0}">'.format(video_encoded)
    return HTML(video_tag)
```

## Coherent state

For reference, let's first look at the time evolution of a coherent state.

```python
psi0 = coherent(N, 2.0)
```

```python
result = mesolve(H, psi0, tlist, c_ops, [])
```

```python
plot_expect_with_variance(N, [n, x, p], [r'$n$', r'$x$', r'$p$'], result.states);
```

```python
fig, axes = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(10,5))

def update(n):
    axes[0].cla()
    plot_wigner_fock_distribution(result.states[n], fig=fig, axes=axes)

anim = animation.FuncAnimation(fig, update, frames=len(result.states), blit=True)

anim.save('/tmp/animation-coherent-state.mp4', fps=20, writer="avconv", codec="libx264")

plt.close(fig)
```

```python
display_embedded_video("/tmp/animation-coherent-state.mp4")
```

## Squeezed vacuum

```python
psi0 = squeeze(N, 1.0) * basis(N, 0)
```

```python
result = mesolve(H, psi0, tlist, c_ops, [])
```

```python
plot_expect_with_variance(N, [n, x, p], [r'$n$', r'$x$', r'$p$'], result.states);
```

```python
fig, axes = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(10,5))

def update(n):
    axes[0].cla()
    plot_wigner_fock_distribution(result.states[n], fig=fig, axes=axes)

anim = animation.FuncAnimation(fig, update, frames=len(result.states), blit=True)

anim.save('/tmp/animation-squeezed-vacuum.mp4', fps=20, writer="avconv", codec="libx264")

plt.close(fig)
```

```python
display_embedded_video("/tmp/animation-squeezed-vacuum.mp4")
```

## Squeezed coherent state

```python
psi0 = displace(N, 2) * squeeze(N, 1.0) * basis(N, 0)  # first squeeze vacuum and then displace
```

```python
result = mesolve(H, psi0, tlist, c_ops, [])
```

```python
plot_expect_with_variance(N, [n, x, p], [r'$n$', r'$x$', r'$p$'], result.states);
```

```python
fig, axes = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(10,5))

def update(n):
    axes[0].cla()
    plot_wigner_fock_distribution(result.states[n], fig=fig, axes=axes)

anim = animation.FuncAnimation(fig, update, frames=len(result.states), blit=True)

anim.save('/tmp/animation-squeezed-coherent-state.mp4', fps=20, writer="avconv", codec="libx264")

plt.close(fig)
```

```python
display_embedded_video("/tmp/animation-squeezed-coherent-state.mp4")
```

### Software versions

```python
from qutip import about
about()
```

```python

```
